Add ES|QL NULL values guide (#153245)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-null-values.md

---
applies_to:
  stack:
  serverless:
navigation_title: "NULL values"
description: How ES|QL represents and evaluates NULL values in expressions, filters, sorting, aggregation, unmapped fields, and multivalued fields.
---

# Working with NULL values in {{esql}} [esql-null-values]

`NULL` represents a value that is unknown, missing, or unavailable in a result row. It is common when a document has no value for a field, when a field is not mapped for part of a query, or when an expression cannot produce a value.

> The most important thing to know is that `NULL` is not the same as `false`, an empty string, `0`, or an empty multivalued field. Many expressions that involve `NULL` evaluate to `NULL`, and [`WHERE`](commands/where.md) keeps only rows where the condition is `true`. This can make rows disappear unless you handle `NULL` explicitly.

Reviewer: > The most important thing to know is that NULL is not the same as false, an empty string, 0, **<ins>or an empty multivalued field</ins>**

Null is, in the language, exactly the same as an empty multivalued field (They're the same). So last part is incorrect (and even if this could be considered a technical detail), it would lead to confusion.

It's true however, that NULLs are handled soemtiems differently from "an empty multivalue", conceptually (Like your example at the end with `MV_APPEND`).

I would remove this here, given you explained it in detail at the end. I fear this could lead to confussion: _`I added a field with an empty array "[]", why is it null then?`_

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/b506c1f451177f50312bf9bf16e641a15e557fdd.

Author: LMKWYT.

Reviewer: The "[] can appear as NULL" is a bit abstract. It doesn't read like a clear definition, but given we're still trying to define how nulls work in the language, I think it's fine to not be strict

Use this page to avoid the most common `NULL` gotchas, then refer to the sections that follow for the details behind each rule.

## Common NULL gotchas [esql-null-gotchas]

Use these patterns to avoid unexpected behavior:

| ❌ | ✅ | Why |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `field == NULL` | `field IS NULL` | Comparisons with `NULL` return `NULL`, not `true`. **Learn more:** [Test for NULL values](#esql-test-for-null). |
| `field != NULL` | `field IS NOT NULL` | Comparisons with `NULL` return `NULL`, not `false`. **Learn more:** [Test for NULL values](#esql-test-for-null). |
| `WHERE field != "x"` when you also want missing values | `WHERE field != "x" OR field IS NULL` | `WHERE` drops rows where the comparison returns `NULL`. **Learn more:** [Comparisons and NULL](#esql-null-comparisons). |
| `WHERE NOT field == "x"` when you also want missing values | `WHERE field != "x" OR field IS NULL` | `NOT NULL` is still `NULL`. **Learn more:** [Boolean logic with NULL](#esql-null-boolean-logic). |

> | `WHERE optional_field > 0` when null rows should remain | `WHERE optional_field > 0 OR optional_field IS NULL` | `WHERE` keeps only `true`, not `NULL`. **Learn more:** [WHERE and NULL](#esql-where-null). |

Reviewer: nit: This is a quite expected example. Can we change it with `optional_field < 100`, which could be more realistic? Nittest nit, I know

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/b506c1f451177f50312bf9bf16e641a15e557fdd.

> | `COUNT(condition OR NULL)` | `COUNT(*) WHERE condition` | Filtered aggregates are clearer and avoid relying on three-valued logic. **Learn more:** [Aggregates and NULL](#esql-null-aggregates). |

Reviewer: > and avoid relying on three-valued logic

I don't understand the intent here. a WHERE filter in a STATS does work with 3-valued logic too. So:
```
COUNT(condition OR NULL)
```
Would be translated to:
```
COUNT(*) WHERE condition OR NULL
```
(If that `OR NULL` was something else, like `OR conditions IS NULL`).

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/b506c1f451177f50312bf9bf16e641a15e557fdd.

Comparisons involving `NULL` evaluate to `NULL`. This includes `==`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, and `>=`.

This can be surprising with exclusions. The following query does not keep rows where `process.name` is `NULL`:

```esql
FROM logs
| WHERE process.name != "svchost.exe"
```

When `process.name` is `NULL`, the comparison evaluates to `NULL`, and `WHERE` drops the row. If you want to keep rows with a different process name and rows with no process name, include the null case explicitly:

```esql
FROM logs
| WHERE process.name != "svchost.exe" OR process.name IS NULL
```

The same rule applies when negating a comparison:

```esql
FROM logs
| WHERE NOT process.name == "svchost.exe"
```

Rows where `process.name` is `NULL` are still dropped, because `process.name == "svchost.exe"` evaluates to `NULL`, and `NOT NULL` is also `NULL`.

:::{warning}
Negating a comparison is not the same as including missing values. If the comparison returns `NULL`, `NOT` also returns `NULL`.
:::

## Boolean logic with NULL [esql-null-boolean-logic]

Boolean operators use three-valued logic. `NULL` means unknown, so it is preserved unless the other operand determines the result.

> | `AND` | `true` | `false` | `NULL` |

Reviewer: I understand the "matrix" idea with these tables, but as only the header is rendered as a "header" and the first column is rendered normally, it's confusing. or at least I had to read it twice to understand it.

Can we make the first column a header too, with html or something? A bold would work too, but the header color would not be present.

In any case, I would add a quick explanation saying that those should be interpreted as... Boolean matrices? Not sure the correct wording here. The thing is they look like truth tables right now, but they're not!

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/b506c1f451177f50312bf9bf16e641a15e557fdd.

Author: LMKWYT.

Reviewer: Better now. There's now a distinction, which is enough IMO

If you want a filter to keep rows where a value is either missing or matches another condition, include both cases:

```esql
FROM employees
| WHERE salary > 0 OR salary IS NULL
```

## Expressions and functions [esql-null-functions]

Many scalar functions return `NULL` when an input is `NULL`. This preserves unknown or unavailable values instead of inventing a result.

Use conditional functions and expressions when you want to replace or branch on `NULL` values:

```esql
ROW department = NULL
| EVAL department = COALESCE(department, "Unknown")
```

::::{dropdown} Example response
```text
department
----------
Unknown
```
::::

Useful references:

- [`COALESCE`](functions-operators/conditional-functions-and-expressions/coalesce.md) returns the first non-null value.
- [`CASE`](functions-operators/conditional-functions-and-expressions/case.md) chooses a result based on conditions.
- [Type conversion functions](functions-operators/type-conversion-functions.md) can produce `NULL` when a value cannot be converted.

For exact behavior, check the reference page for the function you are using.

## Aggregates and NULL [esql-null-aggregates]

> Aggregate functions handle `NULL` according to the function.

Reviewer: nit. I had to read it twice. Maybe you have better suggestions, or maybe it's a me-problem.
```suggestion
Aggregate functions handle `NULL` depending on the function.
```

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/b506c1f451177f50312bf9bf16e641a15e557fdd.

Common cases:

- `COUNT(*)` and `COUNT()` count rows.
- `COUNT(field)` counts non-null values in `field`.
- `COUNT(NULL)` returns `0`.
- `COUNT(false)` returns `1`, because `false` is a non-null value.
- Other aggregates generally ignore null input values and return `NULL` when there are no values to aggregate. Check each aggregate function's reference page for details.

> - Grouping by a `NULL` expression creates a group with a `NULL` key.

Reviewer: This is probably one of the most different handlings of null we have, it may be worth its own paragraph and code example with its example response (Maybe?)

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/b506c1f451177f50312bf9bf16e641a15e557fdd.

---
applies_to:
  stack:
  serverless:
navigation_title: "NULL values"
description: How ES|QL represents and evaluates NULL values in expressions, filters, sorting, aggregation, unmapped fields, and multivalued fields.
---

# Working with NULL values in {{esql}} [esql-null-values]

`NULL` represents a value that is unknown, missing, or unavailable in a result row. It is common when a document has no value for a field, when a field is not mapped for part of a query, or when an expression cannot produce a value.

The most important thing to know is that `NULL` is not the same as `false`, an empty string, or `0`. Many expressions that involve `NULL` evaluate to `NULL`, and [`WHERE`](commands/where.md) keeps only rows where the condition is `true`. This can make rows disappear unless you handle `NULL` explicitly.

Use this page to avoid the most common `NULL` gotchas, then refer to the sections that follow for the details behind each rule.

## Common NULL gotchas [esql-null-gotchas]

Use these patterns to avoid unexpected behavior:

> | ❌ | ✅ | Why |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| ❌ Avoid | ✅ Use instead | Why |
```
WDYT?

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/2089c392424f.

| `WHERE field != "x"` when you also want missing values | `WHERE field != "x" OR field IS NULL` | `WHERE` drops rows where the comparison returns `NULL`. **Learn more:** [Comparisons and NULL](#esql-null-comparisons). |
| `WHERE NOT field == "x"` when you also want missing values | `WHERE field != "x" OR field IS NULL` | `NOT NULL` is still `NULL`. **Learn more:** [Boolean logic with NULL](#esql-null-boolean-logic). |
| `WHERE optional_field < 100` when null rows should remain | `WHERE optional_field < 100 OR optional_field IS NULL` | `WHERE` keeps only `true`, not `NULL`. **Learn more:** [WHERE and NULL](#esql-where-null). |
| `COUNT(condition OR NULL)` | `COUNT(*) WHERE condition` | Filtered aggregates state the condition directly. **Learn more:** [Aggregates and NULL](#esql-null-aggregates). |

:::{warning}
Rows can disappear when a `WHERE` condition evaluates to `NULL`. `WHERE` keeps only rows where the condition is `true`; it drops both `false` and `NULL`.
:::

## Test for NULL values [esql-test-for-null]

Use `IS NULL` and `IS NOT NULL` to test whether an expression evaluates to a `NULL` value.

> The following query returns rows where `department` evaluates to `NULL`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following query returns rows where `languages` evaluates to `NULL`:
```

```esql
FROM employees

> | WHERE department IS NULL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| WHERE languages IS NULL
```

employees has no department field as far as I know

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/2089c392424f.

| **`false`** | `false` | `false` | `false` |
| **`NULL`** | `NULL` | `false` | `NULL` |

| left `OR` right | `true` | `false` | `NULL` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **`true`** | `true` | `true` | `true` |
| **`false`** | `true` | `false` | `NULL` |
| **`NULL`** | `true` | `NULL` | `NULL` |

| expression | result |
| --- | --- |
| `NOT true` | `false` |
| `NOT false` | `true` |
| `NOT NULL` | `NULL` |

## WHERE and NULL [esql-where-null]

`WHERE` keeps rows only when the condition evaluates to `true`. Rows where the condition evaluates to `false` or `NULL` are filtered out.

The following query returns no rows, because `x == NULL` evaluates to `NULL`:

```esql
ROW x = NULL
| WHERE x == NULL
```

::::{dropdown} Example response
```text
Empty result set
```
::::

Use `IS NULL` to keep rows where an expression evaluates to `NULL`:

```esql
ROW x = NULL
| WHERE x IS NULL
```

::::{dropdown} Example response
```text
       x
--------
    null
```
::::

The `IS NULL` predicate returns `true`, so `WHERE` keeps the row.

If you want a filter to keep rows where a value is either missing or matches another condition, include both cases:

```esql
FROM employees

> | WHERE salary < 100 OR salary IS NULL

Reviewer 2: Salaries in that dataset run from 25,324 to 74,999 and salary is never null.

Maybe `WHERE languages < 3 OR languages IS NULL` could work?

```esql
ROW x = NULL
| STATS rows = COUNT(*), values = COUNT(x), nulls = COUNT(NULL)
```

::::{dropdown} Example response
```text
    rows |  values |   nulls
---------+---------+--------
       1 |       0 |       0
```
::::

Do not use `COUNT(condition OR NULL)` unless you specifically want to rely on three-valued logic. Prefer a filtered aggregate:

```esql
FROM employees
| STATS hired = COUNT(*) WHERE still_hired
```

Other aggregates commonly return `NULL` when every input value is `NULL`. The following query has a row to aggregate, but no non-null value for `SUM`:

```esql
ROW x = NULL
| STATS sum_x = SUM(TO_INTEGER(x))
```

::::{dropdown} Example response
```text
   sum_x
--------
    null
```
::::

Refer to [`COUNT`](functions-operators/aggregation-functions/count.md) and [aggregation functions](functions-operators/aggregation-functions.md).

## Sorting and NULL [esql-null-sorting]

By default, `NULL` values are treated as larger than any other value. This means:

- ascending sorts put `NULL` values last
- descending sorts put `NULL` values first

Use `NULLS FIRST` or `NULLS LAST` to choose a different placement:

```esql
FROM employees

> | SORT department ASC NULLS FIRST

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| SORT first_name ASC NULLS FIRST
```

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/2089c392424f.

```

Refer to [`SORT`](commands/sort.md).

## Missing values, unmapped fields, and NULL [esql-missing-unmapped-null]

Missing values, unmapped fields, and `NULL` are related but not the same thing.

:::{note}

> Missing is data-level, unmapped is schema-level, and `NULL` is the ES|QL value that a query can evaluate or return.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Missing is data-level, unmapped is schema-level, and `NULL` is the {{esql}} value that a query can evaluate or return.
```

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/2089c392424f.

:::

- A missing value is a document or result row that has no value for a field. In {{esql}}, this often appears as `NULL`.
- An unmapped field is a field that exists in indexed documents but is not defined in the index mapping. This is a schema-level condition.
- With `SET unmapped_fields = "nullify"`, fully unmapped fields return `NULL`.

> - With `SET unmapped_fields = "load"`, {{esql}} can load real values from `_source`; values absent from `_source` still return `NULL`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- With `SET unmapped_fields = "nullify"` {applies_to}`stack: preview =9.3, ga 9.4+`, fully unmapped fields return `NULL`.
- With `SET unmapped_fields = "load"` {applies_to}`stack: preview =9.4, ga 9.5+`, {{esql}} can load real values from `_source`; values absent from `_source` still return `NULL`.
```

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/153245/commits/2089c392424f.
